# Networkd Setup for Raspbian (2019-01-27)
## Intro to Systemd
An init provider is the first process that is launched on a Linux system. It is responsible for loading other essential services, and it ultimately becomes the parent of every other process on the system. Among the differences between different Linux distributions is the choice of init system.

`systemd` is the initialization (init) provider most often deployed on recent Linux distributions. On Raspbian and other recent Debian-based distros  `systemd` replaces the aging `sysvinit`. We will interact directly with `systemd` in this tutorial by issuing `systemctl` commands to enable and disable various system-level services.

Beyond its job of launching essential services, `systemd` provides a modular interface to control many parts of the system. We've already interacted with a few of these components when we used `localectl`, `timedatectl`, and `hostnamectl` during the initial setup of the RaspberryPi.

In this tutorial we will leverage three more `systemd` subsystems:

- __`journald`__ - Collects and catalogs log files from system services and applications. You can explore these files with `journalctl` as seen in [Troubleshooting](#Troubleshooting).
- __`networkd`__ - Detects and configures network devices and performs various other network management functions.
- __`resolved`__ - Provides network name resolution and maintains a list of DNS servers (network-based resolvers) to contact based on settings provided by DHCP or `networkd` configuration files.

## Systemd vs Default Networking
By default, Raspbian networking relies on a component called dhcpcd to manage interface settings, addresses, etc. While this component works well for general purpose computing, but it is not a match for every scenario.

The current version of Debian (the base OS for Raspbian) supports `systemd` based network management via the `systemd-networkd` service. Unlike `dhcpcd`, `networkd` is well-suited to managing the base configuration for our router.

## Enabling Networkd
We will enable `networkd` in several steps. Try to complete this process in one sitting to avoid "bricking" your Pi (at least making it inaccessible over the network).

### Retain journald logs
`systemd-networkd` stores its logs in `systemd-journald`. We want `journald` to keep these logs between boots, which we enable by creating the persistent log path.

```bash
# Create the location for persistent log messages
pi@titan:~ $ sudo mkdir -p /var/log/journal
pi@titan:~ $ sudo systemd-tmpfiles --create --prefix /var/log/journal
```

> Note: You can ignore the following warning messages that are generated by this command.
> ```
> Cannot set file attribute for '/var/log/journal', value=0x00800000, mask=0x00800000: Operation not supported
> Cannot set file attribute for '/var/log/journal/5a2a201652d44907a5b494ec107d1432', value=0x00800000, mask=0x00800000: Operation not supported
> ```

### Configure network interfaces
To configure the network with `networkd`, we create files in `/etc/systemd/network/` that match named network interfaces and define our desired settings settings. Create the following `.network` files to handle the default settings for wired and wireless interfaces. If your network is not running a DHCP server yet, be sure to enable link local addresses.

__`/etc/systemd/network/44-eth.network`__
```
[Match]
# Applies to eth0, eth1, ...
Name=eth*

[Network]
# Configure IPv4 using DHCP
DHCP=ipv4

# Enable link local addresses for IPv4 (169.254.x.y) and IPv6 (FE80::)
LinkLocalAddressing=yes
```

__`/etc/systemd/network/48-wlan.network`__
```
[Match]
Name=wlan*
[Network]
DHCP=ipv4
```

### Disable default networking
```bash
# Disable default Raspbian networking
pi@titan:~ $ sudo systemctl mask dhcpcd.service

# Disable legacy Debian networking
pi@titan:~ $ sudo systemctl mask networking.service

# Disable resolvconf service, which manages DNS servers for the OS
pi@titan:~ $ sudo nano /etc/resolvconf.conf
# Add the line resolvconf=NO to the beginning of the file
```

### Enable systemd network services
```bash
# Enable systemd-networkd to replace Raspbian and Debian networking
pi@titan:~ $ sudo systemctl enable systemd-networkd

# Enable systemd-resolved to replace the resolvconf service
pi@titan:~ $ sudo systemctl enable systemd-resolved
```

DNS resolvers for Linux are loaded from the `/etc/resolv.conf`. Rather than manage this directly or through `resolvconf`, we want to load resolvers dynamically from `systemd-resolved`. This is as simple as creating a link 

```bash
# Set up a symbolic link from systemd-resolved resolv.conf to the system resolv.conf
pi@titan:~ $ sudo ln -sf /run/systemd/resolve/resolv.conf /etc/resolv.conf
```


### Modify Wireless Startup
Our original setup was driven by assumptions about `dhcpcd`. Before we reboot, we'll make a few brief changes to manage `wpa_supplicant` on an interface-by-interface basis. 

```bash
# Rename configuration as a per-interface file
pi@titan:~ $ sudo mv /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant-wlan0.conf

# Enable the wpa_supplicant service specifically for wlan0
pi@titan:~ $ sudo systemctl enable wpa_supplicant@wlan0

# Disable the non-interface specific service
pi@titan:~ $ sudo systemctl disable wpa_supplicant
```

## Test Your Configuration
Call `sudo reboot now` to reboot the Pi. Log back in and verify that your Pi is fully operational:

- Confirm that your wireless interface is online
- `cat /etc/resolv.conf` to confirm that it is being populated by `systemd-resolved`

## Troubleshooting
### General Guidance
When logging back into your Pi, you may find that some of the functionality is failing. In addition to validating log files and checking that you completed all instructions, log files can provide valuable information for detecting where an error is occurring.

We have already mentioned `journald` earlier in this guide. In order to evaluate logs that are created by `journald`, we make use of the `journalctl` command. [Read up](https://www.lifewire.com/what-to-know-less-command-4051972) on the `less` utility to learn how to efficiently navigate `journalctl` output.

```bash
# Show log messages
pi@titan:~ $ journalctl

# Include messages marked secure
pi@titan:~ $ sudo journalctl

# Show messages from last boot
pi@titan:~ $ journalctl -k -b -1

# Show networkd messages
pi@titan:~ $ journalctl -u systemd-networkd

# Show resolved messages
pi@titan:~ $ journalctl -u systemd-resolved

# Show wpa_supplicant messages for wlan0
pi@titan:~ $ journalctl -u wpa_supplicant@wlan0

# Load journal from a file path
pi@titan:~ $ journalctl -D /PATH/TO/JOURNAL_FILE

# Learn more about journald
pi@titan:~ $ man journalctl
```

### Accessing a Bricked Pi
If you made a mistake at the wrong point in the previous process, you may not even be able to connect anymore from the network. The only way to debug at this point will be to attach a keyboard/monitor to the Pi or to mount the memory card from another Linux machine or VM.

### Rebuilding Raspbian
Alternatively, you may opt to reflash your memory card and repeat initial setup. If you find yourself in this position, the following recommendations will simplify the process:

1. Copy a fully configured `wpa_supplicant.conf` to the `boot` volume of the memory card before the first boot. Raspbian will move the file to the proper location in `/etc/wpa_supplicant` and set its permissions on the first boot.
2. Remove the previous server key hash from `.ssh/known_hosts` to prevent `ssh` from complaining about the Pi's new key.
    - __macOS/Linux__ - Run `ssh-keygen -R raspberrypi.local`
    - __Windows__ - Edit `$HOME\.ssh\known_hosts` and remove the lines that reference `raspberrypi.local` before you attempt to connect.
3. __macOS/Linux__ - Run `ssh-copy-id -i ~/.ssh/id_ed25519` to quickly copy your public keys into `authorized_keys`. _Windows_ users will have to manually set this file up as shown in previous guides.
